# Free Code Camp: Data Visualisation Project 1 - Bar Chart

## Interactive U.S. Quarterly GDP Bar Chart

### Project Aims:

The aim of this project was to build a small web app with functionality similar to: https://codepen.io/freeCodeCamp/full/GrZVaM

This project was built using the following technologies:

- **HTML**
- **JavaScript**
- **[D3](https://d3js.org/)** to generate the SVG bar chart from the API data
- **[Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/)** for styling with some custom **CSS**

U.S. GDP Data sourced from **[Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED)](https://fred.stlouisfed.org/)**

Chart Data can be found [here](http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/data/GDP.txt).

### Project Requirements:

- **User Story #1:** My chart should have a title with a corresponding `id="title"`.

- **User Story #2:** My chart should have a `g` element x-axis with a corresponding `id="x-axis"`.

- **User Story #3:** My chart should have a `g` element y-axis with a corresponding `id="y-axis"`.

- **User Story #4:** Both axes should contain multiple tick labels, each with a corresponding `class="tick"`.

- **User Story #5:** My chart should have a `rect` element for each data point with a corresponding `class="bar"` displaying the data.

- **User Story #6:** Each bar should have the properties `data-date` and `data-gdp` containing `date` and `GDP` values.

- **User Story #7:** The bar elements' `data-date` properties should match the order of the provided data.

- **User Story #8:** The bar elements' `data-gdp` properties should match the order of the provided data.

- **User Story #9:** Each bar element's height should accurately represent the data's corresponding `GDP`.

- **User Story #10:** The `data-date` attribute and its corresponding bar element should align with the corresponding value on the x-axis.

- **User Story #11:** The `data-gdp` attribute and its corresponding bar element should align with the corresponding value on the y-axis.

- **User Story #12:** I can mouse over an area and see a tooltip with a corresponding `id="tooltip"` which displays more information about the area.

- **User Story #13:** My tooltip should have a `data-date` property that corresponds to the `data-date` of the active area.

### Project Writeup:

For the first Free Code Camp: Data Visualisation Project, I decided to create the bar chart using the low-level D3 SVG API, directly building the bar chart by adding appropriately sized and positions `<rect>` elements. The chart data is fetched from the source using the `XMLHttpRequest` API, with fallback to a saved copy of the data if the request fails. Once the data is received, the bar chart is created.

Going beyond the required User Stories outlined above, the bar chart generated by the app is responsive to changes in the browser window size. Using the `window.onresize` event listener, when the window size changes, the graph is re-rendered to fit in the given screen size (down to a minimum useful size of the graph). In addition, the displayed tool-tip when the cursor is placed on a data bar in the graph adjusts its positioning to ensure it is always contained inside the graph area, and not hidden off screen.

### Project Files:

- `index.html` - basic HTML boilerplate including the `.graph-container` element that the bar chart is appended to. Loads the scripts for the D3 library, Bootstrap and `index.js` which loads the data and builds the bar chart.

- `index.js` - controls the behaviour of the app. After all DOM content has loaded it loads the bar chart data (via online resource or from `data.json` if that fails). Once the data is loaded, the current width of the `.graph-container` element is determined and then the `renderGraph` function is called to build a bar chart of the desired width and add it to the document. In addition the `window.onresize` event listener is set up, to rerender the bar chart if the browser window size changes.

  Scaling and positioning of elements in the bar chart is aided using D3's `scaleLinear()` functionality. An on:hover tooltip is also added to the graph - it is a small div element which has its position, visibility and contents adjusted dynamically based on the current mouse position, using the `mouseover` event on bar chart elements to trigger these changes.

- `styles.css` - custom styles for the app.

- `data.json` - backup copy of the API data. In the case where the data is not available from the online resource, the data is loaded from this file instead.

###
